---
title: ' Titanic '
author: cotes
date: 2099-03-10 16:20:02 -05:00
last_modified_at: 2023-11-30
categories: [ Work ]
pin:     # true
math: true
mermaid: true
tags:   # or [typography, tag-01, tag-02, etc.]
  - classification
  - logistic-regression
  - prediction-profiler

image: 
  path: /assets/articles/cover-austin-chan_web.png
  # image: /assets/sample/coming-soon.png
  alt: Photo by Austin Chan on Unplash.

---


> This is a very interesting classic dataset, and used the passenger data related to the sinking of the RMS Titanic ship to explore some questions of interest about survival rates for the Titanic. For example, were there some key characteristics of the survivors? Were some passenger groups more likely to survive than others? Can we accurately predict survival? These are critical questions that I will try to answer. 
{: .prompt-info }




Classification with Neural Nets Demonstrated with the
Titanic Dataset
We will briefly build a neural network for classification in this example so that
we can compare to other classifications’ attempts in the next two chapters. In
order to do that, we will create a partition variable again. The variable is already
created in the Titanic_Results.sav dataset.
This time a 70% Train/30% Test partition will be used:
COMPUTE Train_Test=rv.bernoulli(0.7).
The Dependent variable is Survived, and there will be four predictors. Pclass
(passenger class) and Sex are Factors and Age and Parch (which refers to number
of parents and children aboard) are covariates. In theory, the neural net
could handle the entire dataset, but neural nets tend to become overly complex
and we won’t have the opportunity in this section to do a proper job of feature
selection. One should be a bit cautious about giving neural net variables
that have a very weak relationship to the Dependent as it will always use all
variables. Weak predictors will be not be given large weights, but they will
make the model more complex nonetheless. So to make it simple in this case,
the variables chosen are variables known to have an ability to predict Survived
(Figure 13-25).
Note that since the output variable is binary there are two nodes in the output
layer as shown in Figure 13-26.



We have much more to say about the results in Chapter 15. The accuracy is
OK, but not stellar (Figure 13-27). Although the accuracy degrades on the Testing
partition, the amount that the accuracy has dropped is within acceptable limits,
but just barely. It has dropped from 82.0% to 77%. A common rule of thumb is
that a drop of greater than 5% would indicate that it is unstable. It does a better
join with non-survivors (83.2%) than survivors (70.1%). This might tempt us to
balance the data (as discussed in the previous chapter), but balancing in SPSS
Statistics would be a bit time consuming and a bit of a challenge. (However,
seemingly difficult steps like this can be much easier with a good extension
command. We discuss this in Chapter 18.) This result is acceptable enough to
represent neural net in the “competition” in Chapter 15. If neural net were to
win, we might want to revisit the model and see if we couldn’t improve both
stability and accuracy a bit. Nonetheless, we will give it one more try








